
Network Working Group                                           R. Droms
INTERNET DRAFT                                       Bucknell University
Obsoletes:                                                 February 1996
                                                     Expires August 1996


                Procedure for Defining New DHCP Options
                  <draft-ietf-dhc-new-options-00.txt>

Status of this memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
   and its working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as ``work in progress.''

   To learn the current status of any Internet-Draft, please check the
   ``1id-abstracts.txt'' listing contained in the Internet-Drafts Shadow
   Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), nic.nordu.net (Europe),
   munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East Coast), or
   ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).

Abstract

   The Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) provides a
   framework for passing configuration information to hosts on a TCP/IP
   network.  Configuration parameters and other control information are
   carried in tagged data items that are stored in the 'options' field
   of the DHCP message.  The data items themselves are also called
   "options."

   This document describes the procedure for defining new DHCP options.
   The procedure will guarantee that:

   * allocation of new option numbers is coordinated from a single
     authority,
   * new options are reviewed for technical correctness and
     appropriateness, and
   * documentation for new options is complete and published.







Droms                                                           [Page 1]

DRAFT           Procedure for Defining New DHCP Options    February 1996


Procedure

   The author of a new DHCP option will follow these steps to obtain
   acceptance of the option as a part of the DHCP Internet Standard:

   1. The author devises the new option.
   2. The author requests a number for the new option from IANA.
   3. The author documents the new option, using the newly obtained
      option number, as an Internet Draft.
   4. The author submits the Internet Draft for review through the IETF
      standards process as defined in "Internet Official Protocol
      Standards" (STD 1).  The new option will be submitted for eventual
      acceptance as an Internet Standard.
   5. The new option progresses through the IETF standards process; the
      new option will be reviewed by the Dynamic Host Configuration
      Working Group (if that group still exists), or as an Internet
      Draft not submitted by an IETF working group.
   6. If the new option fails to gain acceptance as an Internet
      Standard, the assigned option number will be returned to IANA for
      reassignment.

Acceptance and publication

   If this procedure is accepted, it will be added to the DHCP options
   specification as an Appendix.

Security Considerations

   Security issues are not discussed in this memo.

Author's Address

   Ralph Droms
   Computer Science Department
   323 Dana Engineering
   Bucknell University
   Lewisburg, PA 17837

   Phone: (717) 524-1145
   EMail: droms@bucknell.edu











Droms                                                           [Page 2]

